metadata/README.md, before:

Building the mongoDB database for the webapp to access is dependent on bigquery.
To build the db a bigquery service account is needed -
it should be associated with a project 'sraproject',
and a project needs to have a dataset called 'mastiffdata'.

Right now the query is setup to pull metadata for just 150,000 accessions to keep the db small
while running locally for app troubleshooting.
To remove this limit and pull metadata for all the accessions,
remove 'LIMIT 150000' from L75 of bqtomongo.py.

#### Set up SRA metadata access

<!-- start sra-metadata-access -->

Based on the SRA instructions at [Setting-up BigQuery](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/docs/sra-bigquery/)

1. Create project - `sraproject`

2. Go to `BigQuery` search tool

   1. In the `Explorer panel` select `+ADD` to add data

   2. Select `Star a project by name`

   3. Search: `nih-sra-datastore` and select it

#### Create service account key

1. Go to `navigation menu` -> `IAM & Admin` -> `service accounts` -> `+ CREATE SERVICE ACCOUNT`

   - name: `sraquery`

   - ID: `sraquery`

     - NOTE - the name of the actual project id is autogenerated

   - Roles: `BigQuery Job User`; `BigQuery Data Owner`; `BigQuery Read Sessions User`

2. Once the service account is created, click the menu bar under `actions` and choose `Manage keys`

   1. select `add key`

   2. `create new key`

   3. key type: `JSON`

   4. Download key to the `bw_db/` folder

   5. save as `bqKey.json`

3. In the BigQuery console, under `sraproject` create a dataset named `mastiffdata`

<!-- end sra-metadata-access -->

Commit message:

fix: duckdb cleanup (#54)
- Remove unused scripts
- Reformat docs a bit
- Remove mentions to mongodb
- Fix diagram
- Revert command in docker-compose

---------

Co-authored-by: Tessa Pierce Ward <bluegenes@users.noreply.github.com>

metadata/README.md, after:

Building the duckdb database for the webapp can be done via bigquery.
To build the db a bigquery service account is needed -
it should be associated with a project 'sraproject',
and a project needs to have a dataset called 'mastiffdata'.

Right now the query is setup to pull metadata for just 150,000 accessions to keep the db small
while running locally for app troubleshooting.
To remove this limit and pull metadata for all the accessions,
remove 'LIMIT 150000' from L75 of bqtomongo.py.

#### Set up SRA metadata access

<!-- start sra-metadata-access -->

Based on the SRA instructions at [Setting-up BigQuery](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/docs/sra-bigquery/)

1. Create project - `sraproject`

2. Go to `BigQuery` search tool

   1. In the `Explorer panel` select `+ADD` to add data

   2. Select `Star a project by name`

   3. Search: `nih-sra-datastore` and select it

#### Create service account key

1. Go to `navigation menu` -> `IAM & Admin` -> `service accounts` -> `+ CREATE SERVICE ACCOUNT`

   - name: `sraquery`

   - ID: `sraquery`

     - NOTE - the name of the actual project id is autogenerated

   - Roles: `BigQuery Job User`; `BigQuery Data Owner`; `BigQuery Read Sessions User`

2. Once the service account is created, click the menu bar under `actions` and choose `Manage keys`

   1. select `add key`

   2. `create new key`

   3. key type: `JSON`

   4. Download key to the `bw_db/` folder

   5. save as `bqKey.json`

3. In the BigQuery console, under `sraproject` create a dataset named `mastiffdata`

<!-- end sra-metadata-access -->
