README.md, before:

# branchwater

This is the central repository for branchwater.

branchwater is the framework we use for searching large collections of sequencing data with genome-scale queries.
At its core it is a new search index for sourmash signatures,
allowing near real-time search of large scale databases.
It is an inverted index implemented on top of [RocksDB](https://rocksdb.org).

You can read more about branchwater in [Sourmash Branchwater Enables Lightweight Petabyte-Scale Sequence Search, Irber et al., 2022](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.11.02.514947v1), and you can read about one of the earliest use cases in [Biogeographic Distribution of Five Antarctic Cyanobacteria Using Large-Scale k-mer Searching with sourmash branchwater, Lumian et al., 2022](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.10.27.514113v1).

branchwater had a couple of names over time:
- [sra_search](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/sra_search)
- [MAGsearch](https://github.com/ctb/magsearch)
- [rocksdb-eval](https://github.com/luizirber/2022-06-26-rocksdb-eval)
- [mastiff](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/mastiff)
We finally brought it all together under the same umbrella.

Here are a few blog posts:
* [MinHashing all the things: searching for MAGs in the SRA](https://blog.luizirber.org/2020/07/22/mag-search/)
* [MinHashing all the things: a quick analysis of MAG search results](https://blog.luizirber.org/2020/07/24/mag-results/)
* [Searching all public metagenomes with sourmash](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/2021-MAGsearch.html)
* Discussion for the initial prototype for [real time search of the SRA](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/2022-sourmash-mastiff.html)

## Code repository links and details.

branchwater is based on [sourmash](https://github.com/dib-lab/sourmash/issues),
and the search index data structure live there since
[version `0.12`](https://crates.io/crates/sourmash/0.12.0) of the Rust crate.

branchwater is currently (Jan 2024) mostly contained in this repo,
with the tools developed to work with the new index:

- [branchwater-api](https://branchwater-api.jgi.doe.gov/search),
  a search server indexing ~946,000 SRA metagenomes.
- [branchwater-web](https://branchwater.jgi.doe.gov),
  a webapp that takes a genome of interest and rapidly searches for publicly-available
  metagenomes within NCBI's [sequence read archive](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra)
  with branchwater.
  Metadata associated with the metagenome accessions are summarized in interactive tables,
  plots, and maps.
- `branchwater-index`,
  a command-line interface to build the search index.
  See [the Query README](./crates/client/README.md) for more details.
- `branchwater-query`,
  a command-line interface to submit queries to a search server.

There are also additional resources:

* The code for monitoring the SRA and building sourmash sketches from genomes and metagenomes is in [wort](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/wort).
* [sourmash_plugin_branchwater](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/sourmash_plugin_branchwater) is a sourmash plugin exposing more features from branchwater in sourmash.

## Need help? Have questions? Want to make a suggestion?

Please file branchwater-specific issues and pull requests [in the branchwater repo](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/branchwater/).
We also hang out in [the sourmash repo](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/sourmash/issues) a lot,
if you have more general questions about sourmash.
And there's a [gitter/matrix channel](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/sourmash/issues/1686) where you can contact a number of the
sourmash collaborators.

## License information

branchwater is [AGPL licensed](./LICENSE-AGPL).

The webapp was developed by the USDA Agricultural Research Service, Genomics and
Bioinformatics Research Unit group in Gainesville, FL,
Primarily authored by Suzanne Fleishman and led by Adam Rivers.
Check out their other work at https://tinyecology.com.
As a work of the United States Government,
the original code is available under the CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication (CC0 1.0).

Commit message:

docs: start adding some local dev docs; upgrade app; add user documentation (#40)
This PR upgrades the branchwater web app to support display of markdown
documents, and adds an FAQ, along with a number of smaller text changes.

Specifically,
- links out to the MGnify web component in /README.md
- links out to the original USDA ARS app code in /README.md
- adds execution documentation to app/README.md
- adds a `markdownify` filter to the Web app, and serves `/faq` from
`app/templates/faq.md`;
- adds FAQ to the header;
- updates issue tracker links to use a specific issue template
- updates the sketching instructions to mention support for FASTQ
- fixes the `prepare_sra.py` script to use `aws_region`
- bumps the version of sourmash required in `pyproject.toml`

# Ancillary information

## to run the Web app locally, and view the Markdown FAQ page:

In the `app/` directory:
```
pixi run flask --app main.py run --debug
```
and then go to `http://127.0.0.1:5000/faq`, which will render
`templates/faq.md`.

## summary of steps from deploy.md

```
# download sigs and prepare index
pixi run index -j 4
# build test metadata db
pixi run metadata_sra
# load into duckdb database
pixi run load_duckdb --force
# build app, deploy
pixi run deploy build app
pixi run deploy up -d app
```

README.md, after:

# branchwater

This is the central repository for branchwater.

branchwater is the framework we use for searching large collections of sequencing data with genome-scale queries.
At its core it is a new search index for sourmash signatures,
allowing near real-time search of large scale databases.
It is an inverted index implemented on top of [RocksDB](https://rocksdb.org).

You can read more about branchwater in [Sourmash Branchwater Enables Lightweight Petabyte-Scale Sequence Search, Irber et al., 2022](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.11.02.514947v1), and you can read about one of the earliest use cases in [Biogeographic Distribution of Five Antarctic Cyanobacteria Using Large-Scale k-mer Searching with sourmash branchwater, Lumian et al., 2022](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.10.27.514113v1).

branchwater had a couple of names over time:
- [sra_search](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/sra_search)
- [MAGsearch](https://github.com/ctb/magsearch)
- [rocksdb-eval](https://github.com/luizirber/2022-06-26-rocksdb-eval)
- [mastiff](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/mastiff)

We finally brought it all together under the same umbrella named 'branchwater'!

Here are a few blog posts:
* [MinHashing all the things: searching for MAGs in the SRA](https://blog.luizirber.org/2020/07/22/mag-search/)
* [MinHashing all the things: a quick analysis of MAG search results](https://blog.luizirber.org/2020/07/24/mag-results/)
* [Searching all public metagenomes with sourmash](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/2021-MAGsearch.html)
* Discussion for the initial prototype for [real time search of the SRA](http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/2022-sourmash-mastiff.html)

## Code repository links and details.

branchwater is based on [sourmash](https://github.com/dib-lab/sourmash/issues),
and the search index data structure lives there since
[version `0.12`](https://crates.io/crates/sourmash/0.12.0) of the Rust crate.

branchwater is currently (Jan 2024) mostly contained in this repo,
with the tools developed to work with the new index:

- [branchwater-api](https://branchwater-api.jgi.doe.gov/search),
  a search server indexing ~1.1m SRA metagenomes.
- [branchwater-web](https://branchwater.jgi.doe.gov),
  a webapp that takes a genome of interest and rapidly searches for publicly-available
  metagenomes within NCBI's [sequence read archive](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra)
  with branchwater.
  Metadata associated with the metagenome accessions are summarized in interactive tables,
  plots, and maps.
- `branchwater-index`,
  a command-line interface to build the search index.
  See [the Query README](./crates/client/README.md) for more details.
- `branchwater-query`,
  a command-line interface to submit queries to a search server.

There are also additional resources external to this repository:

* The code for monitoring the SRA and building sourmash sketches from genomes and metagenomes is in [wort](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/wort).
* Client-side sketching via WebAssembly is implemented in the
  [MGnify-sourmash-component](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/mgnify-sourmash-component)
  repository, which is then copied into the
  `app/static/mgnify-component/` directory in this repository.
* [sourmash_plugin_branchwater](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/sourmash_plugin_branchwater) is a sourmash plugin exposing more features from branchwater in sourmash.

## Need help? Have questions? Want to make a suggestion?

Please file branchwater-specific issues and pull requests [in the branchwater repo](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/branchwater/).
We also hang out in [the sourmash repo](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/sourmash/issues) a lot,
if you have more general questions about sourmash.
And there's a [gitter/matrix channel](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/sourmash/issues/1686) where you can contact a number of the
sourmash collaborators.

## License information

branchwater is [AGPL licensed](./LICENSE-AGPL).

The webapp was developed by the USDA Agricultural Research Service,
Genomics and Bioinformatics Research Unit group in Gainesville, FL,
and was primarily authored by Suzanne Fleishman in a project led by
Adam Rivers.  Check out their other work at https://tinyecology.com.
As a work of the United States Government, the original code is
available under the CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication (CC0
1.0) at https://github.com/USDA-ARS-GBRU/branchwater-web/.
