docs/deploy.md, before:

# Deploying a new branchwater instance

Deploying a new `branchwater` instance involves bringing up a couple of components:
- `branchwater-web`, the web frontend at [https://branchwater.sourmash.bio](https://branchwater.sourmash.bio)
- `branchwater-server`, the backend serving the RocksDB inverted index for sourmash signatures
- a [mongo](https://www.mongodb.com/) database for the SRA metadata used for
  `branchwater-web` results

A diagram of how these components are connected:

::: {mermaid}
graph LR;
classDef server fill:#4A902A,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px,color:#fff;
classDef web fill:#dc6c11,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px,color:#fff;
classDef index fill:#3c48cc,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px,color:#fff;
classDef mongodb fill:#6980e9,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px,color:#fff;
classDef client fill:#8450e1,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px,color:#fff;

A01(browser):::client --> B01(web):::web
B01 --> C01(server):::server
B01 --> D01[(mongo)]:::mongodb
C01 --> E01[(index)]:::index
:::

Be it for development or production usage,
a [`docker-compose`](https://docs.docker.com/compose/)
configuration is [available in the repo](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/branchwater/blob/main/docker-compose.yml)
that can bring up these components in the appropriate order.

## Quickstart: branchwater with a demo dataset

### Clone the repo

```
git clone https://github.com/sourmash-bio/branchwater
cd branchwater
```

### Set up dependencies

We use [pixi](https://pixi.sh) for managing dependencies and running tasks for `branchwater` development,
you can install it with
```
curl -fsSL https://pixi.sh/install.sh | bash
```
or check updated instructions on their website.

For deploying a complete development or production environment,
we have a `docker-compose.yml` configuration describing the containers and how they connect together.
For using this configuration,
either `docker compose` or `podman-compose` is needed.
While there are many ways to get them installed,
on MacOS or Windows there are a couple of "Desktop" versions with a complete solution
(GUI, start services, configure networking) to make it easy to get started.

:::{note}
You only need one of `docker` or `podman`, no need to install both!
:::

::::{tab-set}

:::{tab-item} Docker Desktop

We recommend setting up [Rancher Desktop](https://rancherdesktop.io/)
for development with `docker compose`.
Follow instructions from their website to set it up for your operating system.

:::

:::{tab-item} Podman Desktop

[Podman Desktop](https://podman-desktop.io/) is the "Desktop" equivalent for Podman.
Follow instruction on their website to set it up for your operating system.

`pixi` tasks default to run with `docker compose`,
if you're using `podman` you need to update tasks to use
```
"podman-compose"
```
instead of
```
"docker compose"
```
especially in the `deploy` and `metadata` tasks.
Edit the `pixi.toml` file and replace entries accordingly.

:::

::::


### The demo dataset

The demo dataset included in the repo has the following SRA accessions:

- [ERR272375](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=ERR272375&display=metadata), a salt marsh metagenome
- [SRR5439749](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR5439749&display=metadata), a human gut metagenome
- [SRR20285055](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR20285055&display=metadata), an air metagenome
- [SRR24480609](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR24480609&display=metadata), a gut metagenome
- [ERR3220185](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=ERR3220185&display=metadata), a bovine gut metagenome
- [SRR6269135](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR6269135&display=metadata), a marine metagenome
- [SRR25653600](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR25653600&display=metadata), a phage metagenome
- [SRR25021205](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR25021205&display=metadata), a soil metagenome
- [SRR25646998](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR25646998&display=metadata), a drinking water metagenome
- [SRR25611550](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR25611550&display=metadata),a food production metagenome
- [SRR7698815](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR7698815&display=metadata), a plant metagenome
- [SRR2243572](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR2243572&display=metadata), a wastewater metagenome

They are listed in this file:
```
cat experiments/inputs/demo_sraids
```

You can modify and use other SRA accessions,
they were chosen just so we can see some results in the web frontend.

### Download signatures and prepare search index

The snakemake pipeline in `experiments/Snakefile` was prepared to
- download pre-calculated signatures for the SRA accessions in the demo dataset from [wort](https://wort.sourmash.bio),
- build a search index
- copy data into `bw_db/` so it can be used further ahead by the containers in `docker-compose.yml`

You can run the snakemake pipeline with
```
pixi run index -j 4
```
which will install all the dependencies needed and run snakemake.
You can adjust how many jobs are executed by changing `-j 4`.

This will create a `bw_db` directory at the root of the repository with the following structure:
```
bw_db
├── index/      # the branchwater search index
├── sigs.zip    # signatures indexed for search
└── sraids      # a list of SRA accessions to download signatures and build the index
```

### Prepare a BigQuery access key

```{include} ../buildmongo/README.md
:start-after: <!-- start sra-metadata-access -->
:end-before: <!-- end sra-metadata-access -->
```

### Download the SRA metadata from bigquery and load into mongo

After the index is build,
we can bring up the `mongodb` that will hold the metadata:
```
pixi run deploy up -d mongodb
```
It is empty initially,
so let's load the metadata next with

```
pixi run metadata
```

### Bring up search index and web frontend

```
pixi run deploy up -d
```

Web frontend will be available at [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000)

Commit message:

refactor: Metadata server updates (#35)
Reorganize the metadata processing into
- prepare metadata from external source (bigquery or parquet in S3) into
a parquet file
- load prepared metadata into mongodb from the parquet file

Merge the Dockerfiles into one based on pixi for declaring dependencies,
and then using the builder pattern to prepare specific images from
app/metadata/index

Update documentation generation to use pixi, and readthedocs to build
only from pixi deps

Add a new tutorial on how to create a local deploy for the downsampled
SRA metagenomes index.

docs/deploy.md, after:

# Deploying a new branchwater instance

Deploying a new `branchwater` instance involves bringing up a couple of components:
- `branchwater-web`, the web frontend at [https://branchwater.sourmash.bio](https://branchwater.sourmash.bio)
- `branchwater-server`, the backend serving the RocksDB inverted index for sourmash signatures
- a [mongo](https://www.mongodb.com/) database for the SRA metadata used for
  `branchwater-web` results

A diagram of how these components are connected:

::: {mermaid}
graph LR;
classDef server fill:#4A902A,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px,color:#fff;
classDef web fill:#dc6c11,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px,color:#fff;
classDef index fill:#3c48cc,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px,color:#fff;
classDef mongodb fill:#6980e9,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px,color:#fff;
classDef client fill:#8450e1,stroke:#333,stroke-width:4px,color:#fff;

A01(browser):::client --> B01(web):::web
B01 --> C01(server):::server
B01 --> D01[(mongo)]:::mongodb
C01 --> E01[(index)]:::index
:::

Be it for development or production usage,
a [`docker-compose`](https://docs.docker.com/compose/)
configuration is [available in the repo](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/branchwater/blob/main/docker-compose.yml)
that can bring up these components in the appropriate order.

## Quickstart: branchwater with a demo dataset

### Clone the repo

```
git clone https://github.com/sourmash-bio/branchwater
cd branchwater
```

### Set up dependencies

We use [pixi](https://pixi.sh) for managing dependencies and running tasks for `branchwater` development,
you can install it with
```
curl -fsSL https://pixi.sh/install.sh | bash
```
or check updated instructions on their website.

For deploying a complete development or production environment,
we have a `docker-compose.yml` configuration describing the containers and how they connect together.
For using this configuration,
either `docker compose` or `podman-compose` is needed.
While there are many ways to get them installed,
on MacOS or Windows there are a couple of "Desktop" versions with a complete solution
(GUI, start services, configure networking) to make it easy to get started.

:::{note}
You only need one of `docker` or `podman`, no need to install both!
:::

::::{tab-set}

:::{tab-item} Docker Desktop

We recommend setting up [Rancher Desktop](https://rancherdesktop.io/)
for development with `docker compose`.
Follow instructions from their website to set it up for your operating system.

:::

:::{tab-item} Podman Desktop

[Podman Desktop](https://podman-desktop.io/) is the "Desktop" equivalent for Podman.
Follow instruction on their website to set it up for your operating system.

`pixi` tasks default to run with `docker compose`,
if you're using `podman` you need to update tasks to use
```
"podman-compose"
```
instead of
```
"docker compose"
```
especially in the `deploy` and `metadata` tasks.
Edit the `pixi.toml` file and replace entries accordingly.

:::

::::


### The demo dataset

The demo dataset included in the repo has the following SRA accessions:

- [ERR272375](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=ERR272375&display=metadata), a salt marsh metagenome
- [SRR5439749](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR5439749&display=metadata), a human gut metagenome
- [SRR20285055](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR20285055&display=metadata), an air metagenome
- [SRR24480609](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR24480609&display=metadata), a gut metagenome
- [ERR3220185](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=ERR3220185&display=metadata), a bovine gut metagenome
- [SRR6269135](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR6269135&display=metadata), a marine metagenome
- [SRR25653600](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR25653600&display=metadata), a phage metagenome
- [SRR25021205](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR25021205&display=metadata), a soil metagenome
- [SRR25646998](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR25646998&display=metadata), a drinking water metagenome
- [SRR25611550](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR25611550&display=metadata),a food production metagenome
- [SRR7698815](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR7698815&display=metadata), a plant metagenome
- [SRR2243572](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/index.html?view=run_browser&acc=SRR2243572&display=metadata), a wastewater metagenome

They are listed in this file:
```
cat experiments/inputs/demo_sraids
```

You can modify and use other SRA accessions,
they were chosen just so we can see some results in the web frontend.

### Download signatures and prepare search index

The snakemake pipeline in `experiments/Snakefile` was prepared to
- download pre-calculated signatures for the SRA accessions in the demo dataset from [wort](https://wort.sourmash.bio),
- build a search index
- copy data into `bw_db/` so it can be used further ahead by the containers in `docker-compose.yml`

You can run the snakemake pipeline with
```
pixi run index -j 4
```
which will install all the dependencies needed and run snakemake.
You can adjust how many jobs are executed by changing `-j 4`.

This will create a `bw_db` directory at the root of the repository with the following structure:
```
bw_db
├── index/      # the branchwater search index
├── sigs.zip    # signatures indexed for search
└── sraids      # a list of SRA accessions to download signatures and build the index
```

### Prepare a BigQuery access key

```{include} ../metadata/README.md
:start-after: <!-- start sra-metadata-access -->
:end-before: <!-- end sra-metadata-access -->
```

### Checkpoint before metadata processing

This is how the `bw_db` directory at the root of the repository should look like:
```
bw_db
├── bqKey.json     # NEW: BigQuery credentials and Project ID
├── index/         # the branchwater search index
├── sigs.zip       # signatures indexed for search
└── sraids         # a list of SRA accessions to download signatures and build the index
```

### Download the SRA metadata from bigquery and load into mongo

After the index is build and we have BigQuery credentials,
we can bring up the `mongodb` that will hold the metadata:
```
pixi run deploy up -d mongodb
```
It is empty initially,
so let's load the metadata next with

```
pixi run metadata
```

### Bring up search index and web frontend

```
pixi run deploy up -d
```

Web frontend will be available at [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000)
