buildmongo/README.md, before:

Building the mongoDB database for the webapp to access is dependent on bigquery. To build the db a bigquery service account is needed - it should be associated with a project 'sraproject', and a project needs to have a dataset called 'mastiffdata'.

Right now the query is setup to pull metadata for just 150,000 accessions to keep the db small while running locally for app troubleshooting. To remove this limit and pull metadata for all the accessions, remove 'LIMIT 150000' from L75 of bqtomongo.py.

## SET UP SRA METADATA ACCESS

Based on: - [Setting-up BigQuery](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/docs/sra-bigquery/)

1. Create project - 'sraproject'

2. Go to 'BigQuery' search tool

   1. In the 'Explorer panel' select '+ADD' to add data

   2. Select 'Star a project by name'

   3. Search: **nih-sra-datastore** and select

## CREATE SERVICE ACCOUNT KEY

1. Go to `navigation menu` - `IAM & Admin`: - `service accounts` `+ CREATE SERVICE ACCOUNT`

   - name: sraquery

   - ID: sraquery

     - NOTE - the name of the actual project id ### is autogenerated

   - Roles: BigQuery Job User; BigQuery Data Owner; BigQuery Read Sessions User

2. Once service account created, click the menu bar under 'actions' and choose 'Manage keys'

   1. select 'add key'

   2. 'create new key'

   3. key type: 'JSON'

   4. Download key to 'buildmongo' folder

   5. save as 'bqKey.json'

3. In big query console, under 'sraproject' create a dataset named 'mastiffdata'

## CREATE ACCESS IN BQTOMONGO.py:

1. Change project id on lines 22 and 24 to:'sraproject-####' and 'sraproject-####.mastiffdata.mastiff_id'

Commit message:

feat: documentation for new instance deployment (#4)
- Allow running in {docker,podman}-compose
- Add docs and initial tutorial for deploying a new instance with
example datasets
- Bring in the search index as additional Docker container in compose
- Use pixi for dep management
- Trigger metadata update for mongodb outside image creation, use only
one mongodb container in compose
- Add sentry for monitoring (opt-in)
- Flask app checks for errors from the search index
- Use docker links to connect to mongodb and search index by container
name
- Update mgnify component to (unreleased) one containing better sequence
parsing:
https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/mgnify-sourmash-component/pull/4
- Update sourmash to 0.13.0 (rust) and use new APIs for revindex
- Add snakemake rules for building search index from example datasets

---------

Co-authored-by: Tessa Pierce Ward <bluegenes@users.noreply.github.com>

buildmongo/README.md, after:

Building the mongoDB database for the webapp to access is dependent on bigquery. To build the db a bigquery service account is needed - it should be associated with a project 'sraproject', and a project needs to have a dataset called 'mastiffdata'.

Right now the query is setup to pull metadata for just 150,000 accessions to keep the db small while running locally for app troubleshooting. To remove this limit and pull metadata for all the accessions, remove 'LIMIT 150000' from L75 of bqtomongo.py.

#### Set up SRA metadata access

<!-- start sra-metadata-access -->

Based on: - [Setting-up BigQuery](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/docs/sra-bigquery/)

1. Create project - 'sraproject'

2. Go to 'BigQuery' search tool

   1. In the 'Explorer panel' select '+ADD' to add data

   2. Select 'Star a project by name'

   3. Search: **nih-sra-datastore** and select

#### Create service account key

1. Go to `navigation menu` - `IAM & Admin`: - `service accounts` `+ CREATE SERVICE ACCOUNT`

   - name: sraquery

   - ID: sraquery

     - NOTE - the name of the actual project id ### is autogenerated

   - Roles: BigQuery Job User; BigQuery Data Owner; BigQuery Read Sessions User

2. Once service account created, click the menu bar under 'actions' and choose 'Manage keys'

   1. select 'add key'

   2. 'create new key'

   3. key type: 'JSON'

   4. Download key to 'buildmongo' folder

   5. save as 'bqKey.json'

3. In big query console, under 'sraproject' create a dataset named 'mastiffdata'

#### Create project id in buildmongo/config.yml

1. Change project id to:'sraproject-####'
2. For testing, you can set 'build_full_db: False' if you'd like to build a smaller test mongodb. Be sure to set this back to `True` to build all metadata.

<!-- end sra-metadata-access -->
